docs: rewrite predicted latency architecture and add well-lit path (#1166)
llm-d/llm-d: docs/wip-docs-new/architecture/advanced/latency-predictor.md

# Latency Predictor

The Latency Predictor is the llm-d component behind predicted latency-based scheduling. Instead of scoring pods by coarse utilization signals alone, the EPP asks an online-trained ML model to predict **Time To First Token (TTFT)** and **Time Per Output Token (TPOT)** for each candidate pod, then routes on those predictions — optionally gated by per-request Service Level Objectives (SLOs).

> This page is a reference for the component: its design, plugin pipeline, ML model, failure modes, and scaling characteristics. For step-by-step adoption — Helm enablement, SLO header usage, verification, troubleshooting — see the [Predicted Latency well-lit path](../../well-lit-paths/intelligent-inference-scheduling/predicted-latency.md). Design rationale and benchmarks are in the blog [Predicted Latency-Based Scheduling for LLMs](https://llm-d.ai/blog/predicted-latency-based-scheduling-for-llms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page is a reference for the component: its design, EPP plugins, ML model, failure modes, and scaling characteristics. For step-by-step adoption — Helm enablement, SLO header usage, verification, troubleshooting — see the [Predicted Latency well-lit path](../../well-lit-paths/intelligent-inference-scheduling/predicted-latency.md). Design rationale and benchmarks are in the blog [Predicted Latency-Based Scheduling for LLMs](https://llm-d.ai/blog/predicted-latency-based-scheduling-for-llms).
```

- **Request costs vary enormously.** A 10-token prompt and a 10,000-token prompt both count as one queued request, but their prefill and decode costs differ by orders of magnitude.
- **Cache reuse is unstable.** Prefix hit rates shift as traffic patterns change, so static weights between cache affinity and utilization drift out of tune.
- **Conflicting objectives.** Optimizing TPOT favors spreading load; optimizing TTFT and cache reuse favors consolidating it. No fixed weight configuration is correct in all regimes.
- **No SLO awareness.** Utilization scorers cannot answer "can this pod serve this request within the caller's latency budget?"

The Latency Predictor closes those gaps by learning the mapping from `(pod state, request features) → latency` directly from live traffic, and letting the EPP reason about headroom against SLOs instead of hand-tuned weights.

## Design

### Architecture

The predictor ships as a set of sidecars alongside the EPP. A **training server** continuously retrains on completed requests. Multiple **prediction servers** read the latest model from a shared volume and answer prediction requests from the EPP on the hot path.

> ![Latency predictor sidecar architecture](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/llm-d/llm-d.github.io/main/static/img/blogs/predicted-latency/architecture_sidecars.webp)

Reviewer: the image is nice, but I think it is better to mimic the existing diagram that you deleted, specifically clearly showing EPP pod boundary, and inside it the EPP container and the predictor as a sidecar

> ### Plugin Pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### EPP Plugins
```

> Latency-based scheduling is implemented as a pipeline of composable EPP plugins. When the latency predictor is enabled via the Helm chart, the full pipeline is wired up automatically. SLO-specific plugins are no-ops when a request does not include SLO headers, so the same pipeline handles both SLO and non-SLO traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Latency-based scheduling is implemented as a series of composable EPP plugins. When the latency predictor is enabled via the Helm chart, the full series is wired up automatically. SLO-specific plugins are no-ops when a request does not include SLO headers, so the same set of plugins handle both SLO and non-SLO annotated traffic.
```

| `latency-scorer` | Scores endpoints. Without SLOs, lowest predicted latency wins. With SLOs, the score is derived from headroom under the configured [scoring strategy](#scoring-strategy). |
| `latency-slo-admitter` | Rejects *sheddable* requests (priority < 0) when no endpoint can meet the SLO, rather than wasting capacity on a guaranteed miss. No-op when SLO headers are absent. |
| `weighted-random-picker` | Selects an endpoint via weighted random selection over the scores. This spreads load while still favoring better-scoring endpoints, and avoids the "everyone piles onto the current best pod" failure mode of pure arg-max selection. |

If the prediction server is unreachable or fails to return a prediction, `latency-scorer` falls back to a composite score built from KV cache utilization, queue depth, and prefix cache match — so a predictor outage degrades to baseline heuristic routing rather than dropping traffic.

> ### Scoring Strategy

Reviewer: I suggest to organize this and the rest of the sections into two top level sections:

## The Predictor
The `predicted-latency-producer` plugin drives interactions with the predictor. For each request, it calls the predictor to obtain latency predictions. Moreover, after the request is served, it sends the request's observed TTFT and ITL latencies as training samples to the predictor to continuously train and update the model.

### ML Model
### Scalability
### Streaming Mode

## Scheduling Strategy
Using the latency predictions obtained by the `predicted-latency-producer`, scheduling is done using a sequence of filtering and scoring plugins to determine the optimal placement.

### Filtering Strategy
Discuss cache affinity guardrails and whatnot
### Scoring Strategy

Author: incorporated this and other reccommendations above.

**TPOT features**

| Feature | What it captures |
|---------|------------------|
| KV Cache Usage % | Memory pressure during decode |
| Input Length | Input token count (affects attention cost) |
| Queue Depth | Queue contention that leaks into decode batching |
| Running Requests | Active decode batch size / GPU concurrency |
| Tokens Generated | Output tokens produced so far |

### Streaming Mode

The `predicted-latency-producer` plugin has two training modes, exposed via a `streamingMode` parameter:

- **`streamingMode: false`** (default) — Trains on end-to-end request latency. TTFT is recorded at response completion (effectively e2e latency); TPOT is not trained. Correct for mixed streaming/non-streaming workloads and for routing-only use without SLOs.
- **`streamingMode: true`** — Trains separate TTFT and TPOT models. TTFT is recorded on the first streamed chunk; TPOT is sampled across subsequent tokens. This is the mode required for meaningful `x-slo-ttft-ms` / `x-slo-tpot-ms` enforcement, and it assumes the workload is fully streaming — a mixed workload in this mode will produce incorrect measurements for the non-streamed responses.

> 

Reviewer: pls be explicit on when to use each mode, a statement for each bullet along the lines of "Use this mode if xyz"

## Source

- **EPP plugins** (`predicted-latency-producer`, `prefix-cache-affinity-filter`, `latency-scorer`, `weighted-random-picker`, `slo-headroom-tier-filter`, `latency-slo-admitter`) live in [llm-d/llm-d-inference-scheduler](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-inference-scheduler). Per-plugin configuration references live alongside each plugin in that repo.
- **Training and prediction server code** (the Python ML sidecars, XGBoost models, stratified sampler) lives in [llm-d/llm-d-latency-predictor](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-latency-predictor).

## Further Reading

- [Predicted Latency Well-Lit Path](../../well-lit-paths/intelligent-inference-scheduling/predicted-latency.md) — how to adopt this path: Helm enablement, request headers, verification, troubleshooting.
- [Predicted Latency-Based Scheduling for LLMs](https://llm-d.ai/blog/predicted-latency-based-scheduling-for-llms) — design rationale and benchmark results.

> - [EPP Scheduling](../core/epp/scheduling.md) — how the plugin pipeline fits into EPP request handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [EPP Scheduling](../core/epp/scheduling.md) — how the plugins fits into EPP request handling.
```
